# Applications

## Application 1: Global reticulate evolution study.

Reticulate evolutionary processes, such as horizontal gene transfer and genomic reassortment, have been proposed as a major mechanism for microbial evolution [@HernandezLopez:2013dd], aiding in the diversification into new ecological niches [@Peris:2014in]. In contrast to clonal adaptation through genetic drift over time, reticulate evolutionary processes allow an organism to acquire independently evolved genetic material that can confer new fitness-enhancing traits. Examples include the acquisition of cell surface receptor adaptations (point mutations) in viruses [@Garten:2009ip] and antibiotic resistance (single genes) [@Smillie:2011jc] and pathogenicity islands (or gene clusters) in bacteria [@Antonenka:2005jea].

Host switching, defined as a pathogen moving from one host species into another, represents a fitness barrier to microbial pathogens. The acquisition of adaptations through reticulate processes either before or after transmission from one species to another may serve to aid successful pathogen host switches by improving fitness and the likelihood of continued transmission [@Remold:2008fl]. In this sense, reticulate evolution may be viewed as an ecological strategy for switching between ecological niches (such as different host species), complementing but also standing in contrast to the clonal adaptation of a microbial pathogen by genetic drift under selection. To test this idea and its importance in host switch events, which are critical for (re)-emerging infectious disease, we provide a quantitative assessment of the relative importance of reticulate processes versus clonal adaptation in aiding the ecological niche switch of a viral pathogen.

Data yielded from influenza genome sequencing projects provide a unique opportunity for quantitatively testing this concept and are suitable for the following reasons. First, the influenza A virus (IAV) has a broad host tropism [@Webster:1992wl] and is capable of infecting organisms spanning millennia of divergence on the tree of life. With different host-specific restriction factors forming an adaptive barrier, each host species may then be viewed as a unique ecological niche for the virus [@Duggal:2012jna]. Second, IAV is capable of and frequently undergoes reassortment, which is a well-documented reticulate evolutionary process [@Li:2010fd; @Mehle:2012ei; @Lam:2011jk; @Tao:2014ik]. Reassortment has also been implicated as an adaptive evolutionary mechanism in host switching [@Ince:2013kc; @Steel:2014ef], although this is most prevalently observed for pandemic viruses of public health interest for which sequences are available [@Furuse:2010bl]. Finally, as a result of surveillance efforts during the last 2 decades, whole-genome sequences have been intensively sampled during a long time frame, with corresponding host species metadata, available in an easily accessible and structured format [@Squires:2012fx]. Because reassortant viruses are the product of two or more genetically distinct viruses coinfecting the same host, a more complex process than clonal transmission and adaptation, they are expected to occur less frequently. Hence, the global IAV dataset, which stretches over time and space with large sample numbers, provides the necessary scope to detect reassortant viruses at a scale required to quantitatively assess the relative importance of reticulate events in viral host switching.

We used the phylogenetic heuristic algorithm (described in the Algorithm section) to reconstruct an approximate global phylogeny for all 18,000+ fully-sequenced viruses in the dataset. In this network of viral isolates, clonal descent is mostly structured by host species, with known global patterns of human-to-human (H3N2 & H1N1, and rarer H5N1 & H7N9), chicken-to-chicken (H9N2, H7N9, H5N1) and swine-to-swine (H3N2, H1N1, H1N2) viral circulation captured in the network reconstruction (Figure S1)(#edit). Edges in the network connected viral isolates with a median genetic similarity of 99.7%, indicating a high degree of genetic similarity captured in the network-based reconstruction (Figure S2). As expected, no clonal descent was identified between viruses of different subtypes. Moreover, the network recreates the phylogeny of known reassortant viruses, including the 2009 pandemic H1N1 and the recent 2013 H7N9 viruses, further validating the accuracy of our reconstruction (a browser-based d3.js visualization is available in Zenodo archive of the Github repository (Materials & Methods) (#edit)). Small-world simulation studies validated our method as being accurate in detecting reassortment events (Figure S4) (#edit), while a comparison of edges to a phylogenetic reconstruction on a subset of the data show that our method captures the shorter end of the distribution of patristic distances on a tree, indicating accurate approximation to phylogenetic reconstruction (Figure S3) (#edit). Hence, our method is capable of detecting reassortment events, which are classically inferred by observing incongruences in phylogenetic tree clustering.

To test whether reassortment or clonal descent was an advantageous strategy when switching hosts, we computed the weighted proportion of reassortant edges (out of all edges) occurring between hosts of the same or different species. When host species were different, reassortant edges were over-represented at 19 percentage points above a null permutation model (permutation test described in Materials & Methods)(#edit) (Figure 1a)(#edit), and when host species were the same, reassortant edges were under-represented by 7 percentage points relative to our null model. Thus, reassortment is a strongly favorred strategy when influenza crosses between different host species.

We further sought to explore whether the predominant use of reticulate evolutionary processes in host switch events were correlated with host phylogenetic relatedness and host ecology. To do this, we first computed the proportion of reassortment when switching between birds, non-human mammals, or humans, which are 3 divergent host groupings with distinct ecological behaviour. (For example, humans are the only known species to employ disease control measures, and affect the ecology of other species (birds and mammals through domestication) at scale.) We further sub-divided avian and mammalian categories into wild and domestic, to assess the impact of anthropological activity on the relative importance of reassortment in host switch interfaces (see Materials and Methods for how AIV was classified as domestic or wild). To ensure that the dataset was sufficient in scope to detect reassortant viruses, we only considered host group transitions with at least 1000 descent events (both clonal and reassortant), or at least 10 reassortment events (dashed yellow and green lines respectively in Figures 1b & c) (#edit). Nonetheless, all data are displayed for completeness.

Here, reassortment is over-represented relative to the null when host groups are different. Only two exceptions occur. The first is between wild birds, where reassortment is over-represented but host groups are not different. In this case, the “wild bird” label encompasses a wide range of host species, and as the natural reservoir for many diverse influenza viral subtypes, we expect to detect reassortment events more frequently between diverse species that may be distantly evolutionarily related.

The second is the human-domestic mammal interface, where reassortment is not over-represented even though the host groups are different. In the case of human to domestic mammal host switches (reverse zoonosis), these are mostly well-documented reverse zoonotic events between human and swine hosts (18)(#edit)), where shared cellular receptors for viral entry (19)(#edit) facilitates zoonotic and reverse zoonotic transmission. This may be a case of host convergent evolution inadvertently lowering the adaptive barrier to host switching. Under representation of reassortment at human-to-human transitions is expected because of the limited number of viral subtypes circulating in human populations that undergo serial selective sweeps, resulting in high sequence similarity within the viral pool (20)(#edit), which likely obscures the distinction between reassortment and clonal descent. However, we also expect antibody-mediated immunity, whether from vaccination or prior exposure, to further limit the frequency of co-infection and likelihood of reassortment events happening amongst humans. Thus, despite the exceptions that may be explained by our current best knowledge of influenza biology (e.g. human to swine transmissions), reassortment is strongly favoured over clonal evolution when crossing between evolutionarily distant hosts.

To further explore the relationship between host evolutionary divergence and the predominance of reassortment in transmission events between species, we compared a common phylogenetic measure of species divergence, the cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene, to the use of reassortment in host switch events. A subset of viral hosts, encompassing a variety of bird and mammal species, have had their cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene sequenced as part of the barcode of life project (21)(#edit). For the subset of edges in the network for which both the source and sink hosts have a COI gene sequence that fulfilled our criteria for consideration (as described above), we computed the percentage evolutionary distance between the two hosts (Materials and Methods). Applying a similar permutation test and assessment criteria as described for host groups above, we found a trend of increasing over-representation at higher evolutionary distances (Figure 1c)(#edit). Thus, as host evolutionary distance, or more broadly, as quantitative niche dissimilarity increases, reticulate evolution becomes increasingly favoured for influenza virus niche switch events.



- Research question: is reassortment favoured when crossing between viral hosts?
- Results are in PNAS paper, so I will import them over with minimal modifications.
    - Main figure
- Need to describe statistical test, as this is required for a reader to understand how the statistical inference happened.

## Application 2: Viral persistence.

- Research question: is reassortment a favoured strategy for viral gene persistence across wintering seasons?
    - Lead author: Nichola Hill (post-doc in lab).
- Results: reassortment is over-represented for persistence through winter, relative to random chance. Describe statistical test.

Caveats common to both applications: always will have sampling issues with the current sequence database.
